\section{Overview of rest of thesis}
The thesis will have three main chapters: Goose, GoJournal, and DaisyNFS.\@
These chapters will be written to be fairly independent of each other. The Goose
chapter is new content that describes how we connect an implementation in Go to
a proof in Perennial, which is used to verify GoJournal. However, the details of
the system are not needed to understand the GoJournal specification or proof,
where we can pretend like the reasoning is directly over the Go code. We can
decouple GoJournal and DaisyNFS by recalling the top-level refinement theorem
from GoJournal within DaisyNFS in enough detail to describe how the proofs are
linked.

GoJournal is described in a published paper~\cite{chajed:gojournal}, and
DaisyNFS is also described in a draft paper. The thesis differs from these two
in that by combining them, we can describe the GoJournal specification in the
context of the file system, whereas the paper was written before DaisyNFS
existed. There is also some redundancy; for example GoJournal had an evaluation
based on an unverified file system whereas the thesis will simply evaluate the
complete and verified DaisyNFS file system.

\section{Timeline}
The file system and transaction system implementations and proofs are complete,
which represents the bulk of the work of this thesis. We also have a fairly
complete understanding of DaisyNFS's performance compared to Linux. I aim to
complete a draft of the thesis by October 1st and leave several weeks for
feedback and revision. There are three main tasks: revising the story of the
DaisyNFS paper based on feedback from SOSP; removing redundancy between the
GoJournal and DaisyNFS papers; and describing a new and more complete
performance evaluation.
